I'm Phil Gail welcome to the program the
UN says almost half of gaza's population
has now moved to the city of Rafa in the
South where they are facing bombardment
deprivation and disease in a space
that's becoming increasingly overcrowded
despite growing calls for a ceas fire
Israel says it will push on with its
offensive against Hamas which is
considered a terrorist organization by
numerous
countries winter is bearing down on Rafa
the city at the farthest edge of
Southern Gaza bordering
Egypt with the Border closed it's the
farthest people can flee a destination
for displaced Gins hoping to escape
bombardment shelters are
overcrowded almost half of gaza's
population is now in Rafa which is the a
small part of Gaza in the Southeast
Corner again this is leading to nothing
but a Health crisis
rainfall makes an already dire situation
worse many makeshift tents can't hold up
for long against a wind and
rainwater yes me a displaced Palestinian
mother says she lacks access to basic
necessities I woke up to my
seven-month-old child who was soaking
wet our house has been destroyed my
other child was martyred I don't have
any blankets or mattresses
I took some for my sister we just have
one blanket between five of us there's
no covers no mattresses no food no water
life is
difficult humanitarian relief is barely
reaching ordinary people like yasine
despite their proximity to the only
Crossing that allows Aid into the Gaza
Strip Israel's military which is also
carrying out strikes on targets and Rafa
blames Hamas for the lack of
access unfortunately it's not the
Israeli side that are preventing it but
rather what we're seeing this morning is
that Hamas are not opening the the
Palestinian side of Rafa and not
facilitating the access of the
humanitarian Aid itself so we need to
ask ourselves again why is Hamas
preventing humanitarian aid while the UN
General Assembly has called for
humanitarian ceasefire people in Rafa
are
pessimistic Israel is well known for
ignoring un and International
resolutions it considers itself Above
the
Law because of that I don't think it
will accept any
resolution with winter just setting in
many fear the hardship and danger that
lie
ahead well Steven Ryan is rapid
deployment coordinator with the
International Red Cross committee he
joins us from Gaza are welcome to DW can
we start with your assessment of the
situation in the territory at the
moment well the situation for civilians
here in Gaza continues to remain a
living nightmare last night there was a
strong wind and rain and with tens of
thousands of people or more living in
tents are under plastic sheating the
situation is extremely difficult for
families who are trying to look after
their their children and for people who
don't have access to enough food enough
water enough shelter and genuinely it's
really really difficult situation for
people here now the the UN humanitarian
coordinator for Gaza says almost half of
the territories population is now in
Rafa that's hundreds of thousands of
people what are you seeing
there well just over 10 days ago I
passed by one site one location uh not
far from where our offices are based and
I saw that there was a couple of dozen
tents uh I passed by one week later a
few days ago and there was hundreds if
not more certainly tens of thousands or
hundreds of thousands of people are on
the move here in Gaza and many of those
people are fleeing only with what
they're able to carry and in a situation
like that some very basic items become
the most valuable uh a mattress a
blanket maybe a meager supply of food
and when they arrive to these places
they're already very very crowded
there's not enough if any sanitation
facilities people have to queue for a
very long time for water and nobody
knows what tomorrow is going to bring
certainly things that there's efforts to
bring in more assistance into Gaza this
this is a positive development but one
of the things that we're deeply
concerned about is their ability to meet
these growing needs that are uh growing
by the hour and to be able to reach
people who are not in Raa certainly
there are uh still many more people
civilians who are protected under
International humanitarian law who are
outside of Raa and we also need to make
sure that uh International organizations
such as the International committee the
Red Cross and any others that are able
to work here are able to provide
assistance to these people in faith to
and while fighting continue that's an
extremely difficult ask right and and
the the problem one of many is is is
there at the end you said to to be able
to for international humanitarian
organizations to be able to work in
safety
so this is hampering your ability to do
your job under these these uous
circumstances you yourselves uh feel
endangered well certainly the
international committee that we across
is no stranger to working in difficult
environments in fact the very basis of
our work is uh helping people who are
affected by conflict civilians no matter
who they are no matter where they are
and of course we engage with all of the
parties in dialogue to remind them that
we're a neutral organization that is not
going to take sides our goal is to try
and provide assistance to civilians
people are in desperately need but to do
that we need need to have access to do
to to reach the places where they are we
need to ensure that uh it's safe for us
to do so so that we can continue doing
this job tomorrow parties to this
conflict need to understand and to
respect that the role of the Red Cross
is to help civilians and it's extremely
difficult for us to do that in these
conditions on just staying with Aid
Israel says it's working to expand
shipments of humanitarian Aid into
Southern Gaza um earlier here on DW we
had an IDF SP okman who was blaming
Hamas for not opening the Palestinian
side of the Rafa Crossing what are you
seeing well from our point of view I'm
like we see a relief trickling into Gaza
at at the current race of not meeting
the needs that are
immense definitely any efforts that are
going to allow more aids to come into
Gaza are going to be welcomed but
there's no limit to the amount of Aid
that's going to be needed here people
are desperate
there isn't enough food there isn't
enough water and there isn't the
capacity in organizations such as ours
to be able to respond to those needs in
these conditions while we certainly
welcome anything that's going to speed
up the uh delivery of Aid into Gaza
there needs to be a a an approach which
enables us to deliver that Aid quickly
and to where it's needed most and that
is not limited to just Rafa that's
throughout Southern Gaza and Beyond
because wherever civilians are they
protected under International
humanitarian law and organizations such
as ours who want to be able to provide
this assistance need to be enable to do
so by the parties of the conflict okay
and of course we again appeal to all
states to use their influence to make
sure that we are able to do our jobs and
that the parties of the conflict allow
us to do so thank you for joining us
Steven Ryan of the International Red
Cross
committee thank
you Israel is coming under pressure from
allies over its war in Gaza after months
of staunch support US President Joe
Biden criticized Israel on Tuesday for
quote indiscriminate bombing in Gaza a
vote by the UN General Assembly also
indicates Israel's growing isolation on
the world stage member nations
overwhelmingly backed a resolution
demanding an immediate humanitarian
ceasefire in Gaza but Israel insists it
will persist with its air and ground
offensive against Hamas which is
classified as a terror group by the US
the EU and several other
countries there was celebration at the
UN as the ceasefire resolution passed
with more than three qus of the general
assembly voting in
favor and Israel's un Ambassador had
argued before the vote that the
resolution would only benefit Hamas but
just a handful of countries joined
Israel and its closest Ally the US in
voting no has been adopted today was a
historic day in terms of the powerful
message that was sent from the general
assembly and it is our Collective duty
to continue in this path until we see an
end to this aggression against our
people while the vote in New York
demonstrates much of the world wants an
end to the fighting the Israeli
government seems determined to press on
it has repeatedly ruled out ending
military operations until all the
hostages in Gaza are freed and Hamas is
dismantled that's despite thousands of
Palestinian casualties and the
increasingly dire humanitarian situation
for those trapped within the besieged
territory these Aid trucks entering the
southern city of Rafa from Egypt are
gaza's LIF line but far too few are
making it
through on Tuesday Israel said it would
facilitate more Aid
deliveries by starting to check Aid
trucks at the Kum Shalom
checkpoint before the Hamas terrorist
attacks on October 7th most Goods
entered Gaza via this Israeli
Crossing now Israel says convoys will
only be inspected at Kem shalom
and will still have to enter from
Egypt joining me now in the studio is
our Middle East analyst shaie rosanes hi
shaie um so we've seen this un uh uh
general assembly vote um for a ceasefire
we've heard president uh Biden speaking
very clearly criticizing Israel for
indiscriminate bombing in Gaza do you
think that this will have any effect in
in uh pushing Israel to change its
course well it's clear from from Israeli
officials statements that they know that
the clock is ticking international
support is not going to last for too
long they're already stting starting to
talk about some Finish Line at least for
this part of the offenses we've seen it
in a couple of weeks uh before after
2024 starts that's unclear but it's
clear that it's it's not much longer
than that um but we need to keep in mind
you know we were mentioning the UN which
which is three three quarters of of
nations were were standing you know in
favor of the ceasefire the Americans are
not there and this is the most important
thing for is as long as they have
American support and backing to keep on
fighting against Hamas they will do that
and despite the criticism we've been
seeing from Biden Israel feels that it
has the support of the Americans for the
immediate goal of eradicating hamas's
rule in Gaza the problem start when we
start talking about the end game for
Gaza this is where we see more and more
um the Rifts between Israel and the
Americans and the rest of the
International Community growing bigger
and bigger so you would say that
pressure is clear growing on Israel
right now definitely I mean you see the
Americans we I mean they're very much
deeply involved in what's happening in
Israel the uh National Security adviser
the American one is going to be heading
to Israel tomorrow uh Jack Sullivan he
wants to know what's the deadlines he
wants to know what Israel has in mind
and this is exactly where Israel and the
Americans are going back and forth for
quite some time now the Americans say
where where do you see Gaza the day
after and Israel keep saying Israel keep
saying well first we need to get there
and then we'll see and we've seen netan
more and more vocal in the last couple
of days
against any consideration of bringing
the Palestinian Authority the
revitalized reformed one into Gaza and
this is something the Americans are very
not happy with they want to see a
solution for Gaza as part of a solution
for the whole Palestinian problem they
also know this is the only way to bring
in support for reconstruction of Gaza
from Arab countries like the Saudi
Arabia and UAE and other Gulf countries
that say we're not going to help Israel
solve the Gaza problem uh when they keep
on indiscriminately bombing people with
without talking about a long-term
solution for Palestinians and this is
something netan is unequivocally not
even willing to consider right now I
wanted to ask you about the um trucks
Aid trucks that that are being inspected
by Israel at the Kum Shalom Crossing but
we know that the trucks can still only
enter Gaza through the Rafa Crossing can
you explain to us what the point of that
is I mean why hasn't the Karam Shalom
Crossing also been opened wouldn't that
make it easier well to be honest it's
about Keeping Up Appearance Israel said
exactly right after the 7th of October
attack happened we are cutting ties from
Gaza we don't want not want to be in
charge of what's coming in what's coming
out everything that happens needs to go
through Egypt you know we're rolling
that ball to Egypt's uh lap but we know
also again talking about the Americans
and their pressure there's a mountain
pressure for bringing in more
humanitarian Aid the Rafa Crossing is
out is is not as advanced as the kamam
Shalom one the one in Israel the caram
Shalom one which was the one in use the
main one in use up until October um 7th
attack is far more advanced and can
process many more trucks so Israel is
processing the trucks in the C Shalom
Crossing but then sending them back to
Egypt to go through Rafa there is an
understanding partially probably we will
see that part of the pressure applied by
Sullivan tomorrow and the Americans
saying drop the theatrics drop Technics
let's bring Aid in in the most efficient
way if it means that gums directly
through Israel let's do that because
this is technically you know technical
elements that are eventually not helping
anybody cuz we we're seeing more and
more uh death in Gaza and the dire
situation there it's not even helping in
the benefit of Israel in it's in its
cause in in you know trying to push
Hamas away from from the strip our
Middle East analyst shannie rosanes
thanks so much shannie you're
welcome